README.md, before:


# -- fisch --

3d engine, refactor of [bovengine](https://github.com/phil-stein/bovengine), which was a refactor of [mooh_engine](https://github.com/phil-stein/mooh_engine) <br>
written in c99<br>

**still under development | unstable**

using:      [glfw3](https://www.glfw.org/), [glad](https://glad.dav1d.de/), [stb_image & stb_ds](https://github.com/nothings/stb), [nuklear](https://github.com/Immediate-Mode-UI/Nuklear), [thread.h](https://github.com/mattiasgustavsson/libs/blob/main/docs/thread.md) <br>
and my own: [math-library](https://github.com/phil-stein/math), [global-defines](https://github.com/phil-stein/global), [serialization-library](https://github.com/phil-stein/serialization),  [text-library](https://github.com/phil-stein/text)

main resources:  
  - [learnopengl.com](https://learnopengl.com/)
  - "3D Math Primer for Graphics and Game Development" by Dunn Parberry
  - "Game Physics Engine Development" by Ian Millington
  - ['the cherno' youtube](https://www.youtube.com/c/TheChernoProject)
  - ['winterdev' youtube](https://www.youtube.com/c/Winterdev)


## current capabilities

<img src="https://github.com/phil-stein/fisch/blob/main/_assets/project_files/screenshot03.png" alt="logo" width="800"> <br>
  - renderer <br>
    - pbr & hdr <br>
    - direct draw <br>
  - level editor <br>
  - physics<br>

# -- todo --

## next steps
  -> `X`   important <br>
  -> `WIP` work in progress
  - *organization*
    - [release system](#organization) `X`
    - [rest of organization](#organization) `WIP`
  - *buggs*
    - [all buggs](#buggs)
  - *optimizations* 
    - [custom asset archive files](#optimizations) `WIP`
    - [multithreading](#multithreading) `WIP` 
    - [batch renderer](#optimizations) `WIP`
  - *base*
  - [ui (mui)](#in-game ui - mui) `WIP`
  - [multiple meshes](#base) ? `WIP`
  - *editor*
    - [undo/redo](#level editor) `WIP`
  - *graphics*
    - [blending](#renderer) `X`
    - [cascaded shadows](#renderer) `X`
    - [ssao](#renderer) `X`
    - [aa](#renderer) `X` `WIP`
    - [bloom](#renderer)
    - [particle system](#base) `X` `WIP` 
    - [trail renderer](#base) `WIP`
  - *advanced*
    - [physics engine](#physics-engine) `X` `WIP`
    - [audio](#audio-system) `X`
    - [animation](#animation-system) `X`
    - [chunking for ents/phys_objs](#optimizations)
    - [hot reloading](https://github.com/clibequilibrium/hot-reloading-sample)

## port from mooh
  - todo 
    - [ ] ? multithreading asset_io
      - [ ] not really faster
    - [x] mui/text
      - works in vs19 need to compile .a lib for gcc
        - export texture atlas from affinity in different sizes 
    - [ ] use ecs stuff from bovengine `WIP` 
      - [x] get scripts working
      - [x] script uids
      - [ ] get script by uid
        - [x] with type
        - [ ] generic
      - [x] remove scripts
        - [ ] test REMOVE_SCRIPT()  
      - [x] get collision / trigger callbacks working
    - [ ] terrain isnt working
      - make terrain addon ?
        so have it be entirely optional ?
      - [ ] make it save materials into .terrain
    - [ ] remake .mesh/.tex  file when .fbx/.png is newer
    - [ ] make string type in global ?
      - with length in struct, is more secure
    - [ ] make entities have individual tint colors ?
    - [ ] make bump/arena allocator [optimizations](#optimizations) `WIP`
      - [ ] replace malloc/calloc/realloc with bump_alloc `WIP` 
        - [ ] dont malloc names in assetm
          - have array or some
    - [ ] cant continue playing when pausing in editor
    - [ ] save/load editor cam pos&front selected_id and window state
    - [x] make debug_draw funcs have timed variants, i.e. debug_draw_line_t(), etc.
    - [ ] make core_data external
    - [x] re-add texviewer
    - [ ] add icons to executables, .rc file
      - [ ] kinda works but doesnt update
      - [ ] doesnt show in window or sidebar
      - [ ] [do in glfw](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/44321902/load-icon-function-for-glfwsetwindowicon)
  - buggs
    - [ ] highlights are weird pattern makes object look weird [[file:_assets/project_files/highlight_bugg_01.png|img]]
      - may be wireframe, but looks more like shader error
      - checked gbuffer's doesnt seem to be from there
      - brdf_lut in pbr.frag
        - may be bc. is rg not rgb and loading .tex is wrong
        - generating brdf_lut in core_data fixes it
        - brdf_lut is 16bit float but saved as 8bit int
    - [ ] save_sys_write_to_terrain() gets called even if core_data->terrain_name isnt set
    - [ ] fix tracing
  - sus
    - [ ] state.c line 68

## buggs
  - [ ] glfw mouse button & scroll callbacks 
    - works in nuklear, look at that
    - actually nuklear is stealing our callback from glfw
  - [ ] obj sizes are different than in blender
    - there is a apply transform option but its experimental
  - [?] some shader sometimes buggs, my have been caused by the point below, weird matrices and such
  - [ ] terrain-chunks dont get culled properly 
  - [ ] minimizing window to sys tray causes framebuffer crash [also mentioned here]()
  - [ ] freeing cubemap doesnt seem to actually free any memory
  - [ ] changing WINDOW_MIN, _MAX, _FULL doesnt work
  - [ ] changing THREAD_MAX in threadm.c doesnt affect its speed [also mentioned](#multithreading)
  - [x] mesh loading blender coord sys to mine, gizmo is fcked [also mentioned](#base)
  - [x] glfw uses qwerty, no matter the actual keyboard locale, i.e. qwertz in my case
    - i remapped z to y as a hotfix
    - maybe make key_locale array that mapps qwertz, etc. to qwerty
  - [ ] emissive textures overwrite roughness/metallic, dont think thats right 

## optimizations
  - [ ] [multithreading](#multithreading) 
  - [ ] use textures with r = roughness, g = metallic, ...
  - [ ] change the white tex for no normal
  - [ ] occlusion culling 
  - [ ] batch renderer `WIP`
    - [x] keep track of draw calls 
    - [x] keep track of all template ents
    - [ ] mark static, in template / editor ?
    - [ ] instanced draw all static templates
  - [ ] lod system ?
  - [ ] octree or something for chunks, for entities / phys_objs
  - [ ] custom asset formats
    - [ ] cubemaps 
  - [ ] custom asset archive files | not in use
    - all textures, etc. back to back in one file with a simple header
    - type specific or agnostic ?
      - i.e. just serialize a bunch of buffers or have mesh/texture
    - screws with multithreading, kind of, also very big files
    - maybe just a couple at a time ?
    - [x] textures | not in use 
    - [ ] meshes
    - [ ] shaders
  - [ ] only clear outline buffer when deselecting
  - [ ] memory allocation optimization
    - [ ] read game engine architecture page 427-
    - [ ] stack allocator   ?
    - [ ] frame allocator   ?
    - [ ] pool allocator    ?
    - [ ] chunk allocator   ?
    - [ ] arena allocator   ?
    - [ ] randy memory pool ?
  - [x] figure out why core_data_init() is taking so long: shaders
    - [ ] shader spir-v ?
  - [ ] undo/redo -> john jackman or some on yt pixeleditor
  - [ ] [text batch rendering](#in-game ui - mui)
  - [ ] [mui batch rendering](#in-game ui - mui)
  - [ ] m_lerp(), vec3_lerp() arent working correct see program.c
  - [ ] ecs_manager_updat() entity model update & child/parent logic refactor, is kinda wonky
  - [x] replace cursed if tree in input with switch 

## sus amogus
  - when parenting broke and i fixed it by setting 'is_moved' in 'state_update_global_model()'
    it worked before and something changed in the code that made it no longer work that way
    what exactly changed ???
  - ENTITY_SET_POS() doesnt work properly in program_sync_physics(), need to set velocity to 0
  - zip archive not faster than straight files
  - __init__() gets called before main loop regardless if editor or game

## organization
  - [ ] release system
    - [ ] package assets & exe
      - obv, just the custom / needed assets
      - archive if done yet 
    - [ ] set asset_path to cwd/assets
    - [ ] maybe check if folder build_01 exist and name build_02, etc.
    - [ ] put date in folder / exe name or .txt file or some
    - [ ] use static lib instead of dll
      - [ ] glfw
      - [ ] flecs (compiling as target in cmake does this, but not linking directly)
  - [ ] seperate save_sys.c into terrain & entities
  - [ ] program_app_default_logic() -> cant do debug stuff in game
    - setting defines in makefile gives error
  - [ ] implement glfw opengl debug context, learnopengl page 439 ?
  - [ ] check shaders via reference compiler, page 444, debug_opengl.h
  - [ ] framebuffer debug, page 444, debug_opengl.h
  - [ ] add missing P_TYPE() funcs to global.h
  - [ ] add icons to exe
    - [ ] texture_view
    - [ ] editor
  - [x] make global submodule again, check if phys, serialization are still submodules
  - [ ] remove pos  maybe also cast_shadow, etc. from dir light
  - [ ] add [tracing](https://balau82.wordpress.com/2010/10/06/trace-and-profile-function-calls-with-gcc/)
    - either figure out a way to decode function pointer to names in app, print on ERR()
    - or do it in a file like the tutorial
  - [ ] add [profiling](https://ftp.gnu.org/old-gnu/Manuals/gprof-2.9.1/html_mono/gprof.html), [tutorial](https://www.thegeekstuff.com/2012/08/gprof-tutorial/)
  - [ ] make most funcs dbg error checked ? (tracing would make this redundant) 
    - [ ] use dbg funcs for materials in assetm ?
    - [x] make dbg check a macro to set easy and compile out ?
      - when compiled out file & line cause errors
      - are file & line impacting performance ?
    - [ ] state
    - [ ] etc.
  - [ ] go through all files check for unecessary header includes, to remove clutter
  - [ ] make functions with entity->id as arg have entity_t* version also, i.e. state_entity_remove(entity_t* e)
    - state_entity_remove(entity_t* e);
      INLINE state_entity_remove_id(int id) { state_entity_get(id); remove }
  - [ ] finish math_test.h `WIP`
  - [ ] make state.c world_arr & world_arr_len available in core_data as pointer
  - [ ] move structure save/load from save_sys.c to editor_save.c ?
  - [ ] track memory allcations through MALLOC(), FREE(), etc. and stb_ds.h
  - [x] move internal shaders, aka. deferred, lighting, etc. to core/templates/shader_templates

## tools
  - [ ] binary dump
    - [x] empty scene
    - [ ] empty terrain
  - [ ] "model-viewer/-editor" for shaders / materials / anim / particles
  - [ ] tracing / profiling ?

## base
  - [ ] asset manager
    - [ ] free assets
      - [x] textures
      - [ ] meshes
      - [ ] cubemaps [doesnt work](#buggs) `WIP`
      - [ ] shaders
    - [ ] load shaders from zip  ?
    - [ ] load cubemaps from zip ?
    - [ ] handle missing assets
  - [ ] hot-reload shaders
  - [ ] make seperate editor map file so f.e. structures can be stored special and edited all at once ? 
  - [ ] setup 32bit (-m32) : [tdm docs](https://github.com/jmeubank/tdm-distrib/blob/master/tdm64/core/README-gcc-tdm64.md)
    - [ ] reset all dynamic objects ? 
      - this way we don't have to reload the entire thing 
      - not sure if needed in final game though
      - requires restructuring probably
      - reload suprisingly fast
    - [ ] game saves system
      - single map file, never changed
      - multiple variants of that with changes
        - i.e. 'save01.scene', 'mygame.scene', etc.
  - [ ] billboards
  - [ ] particle system
    - cpu / gpu side or mix ?
    - [ ] pooling
    - [ ] billboards
    - [ ] different spawn "shapes"
      - [ ] circle
      - [ ] cone
      - [ ] sphere
      - [ ] cylinder ?
    - [ ] animated textures
    - [ ] integrate trail renderer
  - [ ] trail renderer
  - [ ] debug tools
    - [ ] make debug_draw_circle() func use mat4 and vec3 instead of pythag `WIP`
      - precompute x, y, z circles for axis aligned, like sphere collider
    - [ ] add profiler [also mentioned](#organization)
  - [ ] controller support ?
  - [x] keep_transform when parenting / un-parenting 
  - [ ] multiple meshes per entity `WIP`

## renderer
  - [ ] blending
    - learnopengl weighted blending 'OIT'
    - [[file:C:/Users/phili/Documents/#04_LearnOpenGL/#guest_01_OIT/learnopengl-com-Guest-Articles-2020-OIT-Introduction.pdf|introduction]]
    - [[file:C:/Users/phili/Documents/#04_LearnOpenGL/#guest_01_OIT/learnopengl-com-Guest-Articles-2020-OIT-Weighted-Blended.pdf|tutorial]]
  - [ ] cascaded shadows
    - from cherno video 
    - also on learnopengl
  - [ ] ssao
  - [ ] bloom
  - [ ] custom anti aliasing, i.e. fxaa
    - [x] try built in again 
      - dont work, white around objs
  - [ ] lut tone mapping
  - [ ] water
  - [x] emissive texture (easy)

## entity-system

## level-editor
  - [x] pause mid game
  - [ ] generate struct literal for 
    - [x] materials
    - [ ] entities
    - [ ] shaders
  - [ ] particle system editor
    - seperate ?
  - [ ] make gui less shit
  - [ ] ask to save if unsaved changes
    - use operation.c
  - [ ] seperate windows into their own .c files
  - [ ] undo `WIP`
    - [ ] keep track of changes
  - [ ] redo
  - [x] deselect on play, reselect after
    - save custom editor info to file 

## physics-engine
  - 3rd party engine ?
    - [jolt physics](https://github.com/jrouwe/JoltPhysics)
      - [dagor engine](https://github.com/GaijinEntertainment/DagorEngine) 
    - [bullet](https://github.com/bulletphysics/bullet3)
      - [bullet candle, c binding](https://github.com/EvilPudding/bullet.candle) 
  - [ ] chunking for phys_obj_t
    - [ ] collisison detection in chunk
    - [ ] ray casting in chunk
  - [x] ray casting
    - [x] v sphere
    - [x] v aabb
  - [x] swept collision detection
    - [x] sphere v sphere
    - [x] aabb v aabb
    - [x] aabb v sphere
  - [ ] finish only checking collisions
        for every possible combination
        phys_update_new()
    - need to to do both objs in phys_resolution()
    - objs vibrating
    - can just break in phys_update_old(), line: 362

## multithreading
  - maybe make abstraction for thread stuff ?
  - add [profiler](#base) first
  - architecture
    - main (input, gameplay, etc.)
    - worker (asset-loading, terrain, etc.)
    - renderer
    - physics
  - [ ] asset loading
    - [x] textures
      - [ ] changing THREAD_MAX in threadm.c doesnt affect its speed [also mentioned](#buggs)
      - [ ] experiment with thread count
      - [ ] load textures with pbo's, is supposed to be faster `WIP`
      - [ ] multithreaded when not loading arr
    - [ ] meshes
    - [ ] shaders
    - [ ] scene ?
    - [ ] terrain
  - [ ] physics
  - [ ] rendering ?
    - decouple entities from main-thread
    - duplicate world, etc. -> merge
  - [ ] terrain

## audio-system
  - using miniaudio, soloud, sokol, etc.
  - [ ] clips
  - [ ] loops
  - [ ] sfx ?
  - [ ] system
    - queue bg music, ambient, etc.

## animation-system
  - [ ] learnopengl.com
  - [ ] system
  - [ ] blending animations

## artstyle look-dev
  - [ ] draw sketch of scene
    - the base: old wooden house, trees, 
      rusty equipment, overgrown
  - [ ] make 3d polished scene 
    - [ ] stones
      - [ ] small
      - [x] middle
      - [ ] big
    - [ ] trees
      - [ ] normal
      - [x] big (fucked normals)
    - [ ] bush
    - [ ] fence
    - [ ] old hut

## terrain generation
  - [ ] normals & tangents on edges
    - button in gui to calc for all chunks

## in-game ui - mui
  - [x] text (already wrote lib)
  - mui_text_f(0.5f, 0.75f) funcs
  - hook rendering into core
  - [x] draw quads 
    - [x] scale with screen
    - [x] textured quads
  - [ ] aligned group hierarchy
    - [x] row / column
    - [ ] centered
    - [ ] left / right
    - [ ] up / down
  - [ ] batch rendering 

## game design
  - [ ] game design doc
  - [ ] ...

Commit message:

DESKTOP: from fisch, added raycast normals and masking raycast by id

README.md, after:


# -- fisch --

3d engine, refactor of [bovengine](https://github.com/phil-stein/bovengine), which was a refactor of [mooh_engine](https://github.com/phil-stein/mooh_engine) <br>
written in c99<br>

**still under development | unstable**

using:      [glfw3](https://www.glfw.org/), [glad](https://glad.dav1d.de/), [stb_image & stb_ds](https://github.com/nothings/stb), [nuklear](https://github.com/Immediate-Mode-UI/Nuklear), [thread.h](https://github.com/mattiasgustavsson/libs/blob/main/docs/thread.md) <br>
and my own: [math-library](https://github.com/phil-stein/math), [global-defines](https://github.com/phil-stein/global), [serialization-library](https://github.com/phil-stein/serialization),  [text-library](https://github.com/phil-stein/text)

main resources:  
  - [learnopengl.com](https://learnopengl.com/)
  - "3D Math Primer for Graphics and Game Development" by Dunn Parberry
  - "Game Physics Engine Development" by Ian Millington
  - ['the cherno' youtube](https://www.youtube.com/c/TheChernoProject)
  - ['winterdev' youtube](https://www.youtube.com/c/Winterdev)


## current capabilities

<img src="https://github.com/phil-stein/fisch/blob/main/_assets/project_files/screenshot03.png" alt="logo" width="800"> <br>
  - renderer <br>
    - pbr & hdr <br>
    - direct draw <br>
  - level editor <br>
  - physics<br>

# -- todo --

## next steps
  -> `X`   important <br>
  -> `WIP` work in progress
  - *organization*
    - [release system](#organization) `X`
    - [rest of organization](#organization) `WIP`
  - *buggs*
    - [all buggs](#buggs)
  - *optimizations* 
    - [custom asset archive files](#optimizations) `WIP`
    - [multithreading](#multithreading) `WIP` 
    - [batch renderer](#optimizations) `WIP`
  - *base*
  - [ui (mui)](#in-game ui - mui) `WIP`
  - [multiple meshes](#base) ? `WIP`
  - *editor*
    - [undo/redo](#level editor) `WIP`
  - *graphics*
    - [blending](#renderer) `X`
    - [cascaded shadows](#renderer) `X`
    - [ssao](#renderer) `X`
    - [aa](#renderer) `X` `WIP`
    - [bloom](#renderer)
    - [particle system](#base) `X` `WIP` 
    - [trail renderer](#base) `WIP`
  - *advanced*
    - [physics engine](#physics-engine) `X` `WIP`
    - [audio](#audio-system) `X`
    - [animation](#animation-system) `X`
    - [chunking for ents/phys_objs](#optimizations)
    - [hot reloading](https://github.com/clibequilibrium/hot-reloading-sample)

## port from mooh
  - todo 
    - [ ] ? multithreading asset_io
      - [ ] not really faster
    - [x] mui/text
      - works in vs19 need to compile .a lib for gcc
        - export texture atlas from affinity in different sizes 
    - [ ] use ecs stuff from bovengine `WIP` 
      - [x] get scripts working
      - [x] script uids
      - [ ] get script by uid
        - [x] with type
        - [ ] generic
      - [x] remove scripts
        - [ ] test REMOVE_SCRIPT()  
      - [x] get collision / trigger callbacks working
    - [ ] terrain isnt working
      - make terrain addon ?
        so have it be entirely optional ?
      - [ ] make it save materials into .terrain
    - [ ] remake .mesh/.tex  file when .fbx/.png is newer
    - [ ] make string type in global ?
      - with length in struct, is more secure
    - [ ] make entities have individual tint colors ?
    - [ ] make bump/arena allocator [optimizations](#optimizations) `WIP`
      - [ ] replace malloc/calloc/realloc with bump_alloc `WIP` 
        - [ ] dont malloc names in assetm
          - have array or some
    - [ ] cant continue playing when pausing in editor
    - [ ] save/load editor cam pos&front selected_id and window state
    - [x] make debug_draw funcs have timed variants, i.e. debug_draw_line_t(), etc.
    - [ ] make core_data external
    - [x] re-add texviewer
    - [ ] add icons to executables, .rc file
      - [ ] kinda works but doesnt update
      - [ ] doesnt show in window or sidebar
      - [ ] [do in glfw](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/44321902/load-icon-function-for-glfwsetwindowicon)
    - [x] add normals to raycasts
    - [ ] add excluding objs to raycasts
      - [x] by id
      - [ ] by tag
    - [ ] fix including math header causing errors
  - buggs
    - [ ] highlights are weird pattern makes object look weird [[file:_assets/project_files/highlight_bugg_01.png|img]]
      - may be wireframe, but looks more like shader error
      - checked gbuffer's doesnt seem to be from there
      - brdf_lut in pbr.frag
        - may be bc. is rg not rgb and loading .tex is wrong
        - generating brdf_lut in core_data fixes it
        - brdf_lut is 16bit float but saved as 8bit int
    - [ ] save_sys_write_to_terrain() gets called even if core_data->terrain_name isnt set
    - [ ] fix tracing
  - sus
    - [ ] state.c line 68

## buggs
  - [ ] glfw mouse button & scroll callbacks 
    - works in nuklear, look at that
    - actually nuklear is stealing our callback from glfw
  - [ ] obj sizes are different than in blender
    - there is a apply transform option but its experimental
  - [?] some shader sometimes buggs, my have been caused by the point below, weird matrices and such
  - [ ] terrain-chunks dont get culled properly 
  - [ ] minimizing window to sys tray causes framebuffer crash [also mentioned here]()
  - [ ] freeing cubemap doesnt seem to actually free any memory
  - [ ] changing WINDOW_MIN, _MAX, _FULL doesnt work
  - [ ] changing THREAD_MAX in threadm.c doesnt affect its speed [also mentioned](#multithreading)
  - [x] mesh loading blender coord sys to mine, gizmo is fcked [also mentioned](#base)
  - [x] glfw uses qwerty, no matter the actual keyboard locale, i.e. qwertz in my case
    - i remapped z to y as a hotfix
    - maybe make key_locale array that mapps qwertz, etc. to qwerty
  - [ ] emissive textures overwrite roughness/metallic, dont think thats right 

## optimizations
  - [ ] [multithreading](#multithreading) 
  - [ ] use textures with r = roughness, g = metallic, ...
  - [ ] change the white tex for no normal
  - [ ] occlusion culling 
  - [ ] batch renderer `WIP`
    - [x] keep track of draw calls 
    - [x] keep track of all template ents
    - [ ] mark static, in template / editor ?
    - [ ] instanced draw all static templates
  - [ ] lod system ?
  - [ ] octree or something for chunks, for entities / phys_objs
  - [ ] custom asset formats
    - [ ] cubemaps 
  - [ ] custom asset archive files | not in use
    - all textures, etc. back to back in one file with a simple header
    - type specific or agnostic ?
      - i.e. just serialize a bunch of buffers or have mesh/texture
    - screws with multithreading, kind of, also very big files
    - maybe just a couple at a time ?
    - [x] textures | not in use 
    - [ ] meshes
    - [ ] shaders
  - [ ] only clear outline buffer when deselecting
  - [ ] memory allocation optimization
    - [ ] read game engine architecture page 427-
    - [ ] stack allocator   ?
    - [ ] frame allocator   ?
    - [ ] pool allocator    ?
    - [ ] chunk allocator   ?
    - [ ] arena allocator   ?
    - [ ] randy memory pool ?
  - [x] figure out why core_data_init() is taking so long: shaders
    - [ ] shader spir-v ?
  - [ ] undo/redo -> john jackman or some on yt pixeleditor
  - [ ] [text batch rendering](#in-game ui - mui)
  - [ ] [mui batch rendering](#in-game ui - mui)
  - [ ] m_lerp(), vec3_lerp() arent working correct see program.c
  - [ ] ecs_manager_updat() entity model update & child/parent logic refactor, is kinda wonky
  - [x] replace cursed if tree in input with switch 

## sus amogus
  - when parenting broke and i fixed it by setting 'is_moved' in 'state_update_global_model()'
    it worked before and something changed in the code that made it no longer work that way
    what exactly changed ???
  - ENTITY_SET_POS() doesnt work properly in program_sync_physics(), need to set velocity to 0
  - zip archive not faster than straight files
  - __init__() gets called before main loop regardless if editor or game

## organization
  - [ ] release system
    - [ ] package assets & exe
      - obv, just the custom / needed assets
      - archive if done yet 
    - [ ] set asset_path to cwd/assets
    - [ ] maybe check if folder build_01 exist and name build_02, etc.
    - [ ] put date in folder / exe name or .txt file or some
    - [ ] use static lib instead of dll
      - [ ] glfw
      - [ ] flecs (compiling as target in cmake does this, but not linking directly)
  - [ ] seperate save_sys.c into terrain & entities
  - [ ] program_app_default_logic() -> cant do debug stuff in game
    - setting defines in makefile gives error
  - [ ] implement glfw opengl debug context, learnopengl page 439 ?
  - [ ] check shaders via reference compiler, page 444, debug_opengl.h
  - [ ] framebuffer debug, page 444, debug_opengl.h
  - [ ] add missing P_TYPE() funcs to global.h
  - [ ] add icons to exe
    - [ ] texture_view
    - [ ] editor
  - [x] make global submodule again, check if phys, serialization are still submodules
  - [ ] remove pos  maybe also cast_shadow, etc. from dir light
  - [ ] add [tracing](https://balau82.wordpress.com/2010/10/06/trace-and-profile-function-calls-with-gcc/)
    - either figure out a way to decode function pointer to names in app, print on ERR()
    - or do it in a file like the tutorial
  - [ ] add [profiling](https://ftp.gnu.org/old-gnu/Manuals/gprof-2.9.1/html_mono/gprof.html), [tutorial](https://www.thegeekstuff.com/2012/08/gprof-tutorial/)
  - [ ] make most funcs dbg error checked ? (tracing would make this redundant) 
    - [ ] use dbg funcs for materials in assetm ?
    - [x] make dbg check a macro to set easy and compile out ?
      - when compiled out file & line cause errors
      - are file & line impacting performance ?
    - [ ] state
    - [ ] etc.
  - [ ] go through all files check for unecessary header includes, to remove clutter
  - [ ] make functions with entity->id as arg have entity_t* version also, i.e. state_entity_remove(entity_t* e)
    - state_entity_remove(entity_t* e);
      INLINE state_entity_remove_id(int id) { state_entity_get(id); remove }
  - [ ] finish math_test.h `WIP`
  - [ ] make state.c world_arr & world_arr_len available in core_data as pointer
  - [ ] move structure save/load from save_sys.c to editor_save.c ?
  - [ ] track memory allcations through MALLOC(), FREE(), etc. and stb_ds.h
  - [x] move internal shaders, aka. deferred, lighting, etc. to core/templates/shader_templates

## tools
  - [ ] binary dump
    - [x] empty scene
    - [ ] empty terrain
  - [ ] "model-viewer/-editor" for shaders / materials / anim / particles
  - [ ] tracing / profiling ?

## base
  - [ ] asset manager
    - [ ] free assets
      - [x] textures
      - [ ] meshes
      - [ ] cubemaps [doesnt work](#buggs) `WIP`
      - [ ] shaders
    - [ ] load shaders from zip  ?
    - [ ] load cubemaps from zip ?
    - [ ] handle missing assets
  - [ ] hot-reload shaders
  - [ ] make seperate editor map file so f.e. structures can be stored special and edited all at once ? 
  - [ ] setup 32bit (-m32) : [tdm docs](https://github.com/jmeubank/tdm-distrib/blob/master/tdm64/core/README-gcc-tdm64.md)
    - [ ] reset all dynamic objects ? 
      - this way we don't have to reload the entire thing 
      - not sure if needed in final game though
      - requires restructuring probably
      - reload suprisingly fast
    - [ ] game saves system
      - single map file, never changed
      - multiple variants of that with changes
        - i.e. 'save01.scene', 'mygame.scene', etc.
  - [ ] billboards
  - [ ] particle system
    - cpu / gpu side or mix ?
    - [ ] pooling
    - [ ] billboards
    - [ ] different spawn "shapes"
      - [ ] circle
      - [ ] cone
      - [ ] sphere
      - [ ] cylinder ?
    - [ ] animated textures
    - [ ] integrate trail renderer
  - [ ] trail renderer
  - [ ] debug tools
    - [ ] make debug_draw_circle() func use mat4 and vec3 instead of pythag `WIP`
      - precompute x, y, z circles for axis aligned, like sphere collider
    - [ ] add profiler [also mentioned](#organization)
  - [ ] controller support ?
  - [x] keep_transform when parenting / un-parenting 
  - [ ] multiple meshes per entity `WIP`

## renderer
  - [ ] blending
    - learnopengl weighted blending 'OIT'
    - [[file:C:/Users/phili/Documents/#04_LearnOpenGL/#guest_01_OIT/learnopengl-com-Guest-Articles-2020-OIT-Introduction.pdf|introduction]]
    - [[file:C:/Users/phili/Documents/#04_LearnOpenGL/#guest_01_OIT/learnopengl-com-Guest-Articles-2020-OIT-Weighted-Blended.pdf|tutorial]]
  - [ ] cascaded shadows
    - from cherno video 
    - also on learnopengl
  - [ ] ssao
  - [ ] bloom
  - [ ] custom anti aliasing, i.e. fxaa
    - [x] try built in again 
      - dont work, white around objs
  - [ ] lut tone mapping
  - [ ] water
  - [x] emissive texture (easy)

## entity-system

## level-editor
  - [x] pause mid game
  - [ ] generate struct literal for 
    - [x] materials
    - [ ] entities
    - [ ] shaders
  - [ ] particle system editor
    - seperate ?
  - [ ] make gui less shit
  - [ ] ask to save if unsaved changes
    - use operation.c
  - [ ] seperate windows into their own .c files
  - [ ] undo `WIP`
    - [ ] keep track of changes
  - [ ] redo
  - [x] deselect on play, reselect after
    - save custom editor info to file 

## physics-engine
  - 3rd party engine ?
    - [jolt physics](https://github.com/jrouwe/JoltPhysics)
      - [dagor engine](https://github.com/GaijinEntertainment/DagorEngine) 
    - [bullet](https://github.com/bulletphysics/bullet3)
      - [bullet candle, c binding](https://github.com/EvilPudding/bullet.candle) 
  - [ ] chunking for phys_obj_t
    - [ ] collisison detection in chunk
    - [ ] ray casting in chunk
  - [x] ray casting
    - [x] v sphere
    - [x] v aabb
  - [x] swept collision detection
    - [x] sphere v sphere
    - [x] aabb v aabb
    - [x] aabb v sphere
  - [ ] finish only checking collisions
        for every possible combination
        phys_update_new()
    - need to to do both objs in phys_resolution()
    - objs vibrating
    - can just break in phys_update_old(), line: 362

## multithreading
  - maybe make abstraction for thread stuff ?
  - add [profiler](#base) first
  - architecture
    - main (input, gameplay, etc.)
    - worker (asset-loading, terrain, etc.)
    - renderer
    - physics
  - [ ] asset loading
    - [x] textures
      - [ ] changing THREAD_MAX in threadm.c doesnt affect its speed [also mentioned](#buggs)
      - [ ] experiment with thread count
      - [ ] load textures with pbo's, is supposed to be faster `WIP`
      - [ ] multithreaded when not loading arr
    - [ ] meshes
    - [ ] shaders
    - [ ] scene ?
    - [ ] terrain
  - [ ] physics
  - [ ] rendering ?
    - decouple entities from main-thread
    - duplicate world, etc. -> merge
  - [ ] terrain

## audio-system
  - using miniaudio, soloud, sokol, etc.
  - [ ] clips
  - [ ] loops
  - [ ] sfx ?
  - [ ] system
    - queue bg music, ambient, etc.

## animation-system
  - [ ] learnopengl.com
  - [ ] system
  - [ ] blending animations

## artstyle look-dev
  - [ ] draw sketch of scene
    - the base: old wooden house, trees, 
      rusty equipment, overgrown
  - [ ] make 3d polished scene 
    - [ ] stones
      - [ ] small
      - [x] middle
      - [ ] big
    - [ ] trees
      - [ ] normal
      - [x] big (fucked normals)
    - [ ] bush
    - [ ] fence
    - [ ] old hut

## terrain generation
  - [ ] normals & tangents on edges
    - button in gui to calc for all chunks

## in-game ui - mui
  - [x] text (already wrote lib)
  - mui_text_f(0.5f, 0.75f) funcs
  - hook rendering into core
  - [x] draw quads 
    - [x] scale with screen
    - [x] textured quads
  - [ ] aligned group hierarchy
    - [x] row / column
    - [ ] centered
    - [ ] left / right
    - [ ] up / down
  - [ ] batch rendering 

## game design
  - [ ] game design doc
  - [ ] ...
